Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Colonel Lannis Hope did not land on Omaha Beach on D-Day, but he did watch it all from offshore that day.
The next day, June the 7th, 1944, D plus one, his unit brought the first tanks to Normandy, an eyewitness to what Hollywood called the longest day, an eyewitness to the horror of death that the invasion left behind.
A West Texas boy and a musician, a member of the Texas Tech band of the 1940s.
Lannis and Peggy Hope are proud parents of three children.
and proud longtime residents of Bryan and proud veteran of World War II.
Colonel Hope, it's a pleasure to have you here today.
I want to go to June the 6th and June the 7th of 1944, days that are certainly very strong in our history of our war.
Talk about where you were, what your job was, and sort of how those days came about.
A little bit of a surprise because you were supposed to go onshore, sundown on D-Day, but it didn't work out that way.
Sort of take us through those two days.
Well, there was a very detailed arrangement and schedule for the landing on D-Day, minute by minute.
And our minutes were listed officially as D plus 13, which is a late afternoon.
Well, of course, we knew by dark that we wouldn't go ashore, so we spent the night again, sleepless,
because we spent the previous night sleepless.
And we waited all day the 7th without the scheduled boats getting to us to take us ashore.
And so finally, late in the afternoon, they, I think, commandeered an LCT
to come to the LST, the bigger ship, and take my platoon, five tanks, off on that ship and take us to shore.
The smaller boat landed us.
We didn't even have to wade water.
It took us so close to the shore.
And we landed in Omaha Beach.
Sun down on June the 7th.
On June the 7th.
And within, we moved up off the beach and onto the land immediately.
Right.
And got out to a bivouac area where we spent the night.
And the next day we started operations.
Started your operations.
Clearing fields.
Now, I want to take it back the day before.
You were supposed to have gone on D-Day, on sundown that day.
But there was a ferry boat that was supposed to have, what, taken you or pushed you to the shore?
And for some reason, you still to this day don't know why.
Never saw it.
You never saw it.
The practice runs we did in England, that was very well done.
The ferry boat would take a whole load from an LST, the big boat, and take them to the shore.
But we never saw that ferry boat again.
About how far offshore were you at this time waiting?
The LST was anchored perhaps a half a mile offshore.
So you were able to see what was going on on the ovation through your field glasses.
I know we're going back nearly 61 years now, but what do you recall about what you saw through those field glasses?
Well, we could see explosions on the shore.
We could hear dimly machine gun fire.
And we could look with field glasses to the right and we could see Pont du Hoc, where General Rudder landed.
We didn't know him then, Adam.
Had never heard of him until after the war.
But we knew that the guns that he took there
could have raped the beach and made it very very difficult to get ashore.
It is bad enough as it was because you've seen the classic pictures of the infantry walking across and as they go some of them fall and die on the spot.
Those people we could see you know with our field glasses right that morning.
Right and then when you did come ashore?
And when you did come ashore
wreckage everywhere no we had a few artillery bursts among us no casualties but there was still some fire there no machine guns they'd already wiped out all the German machine gun nests and stuff up on the hill there and as we went up the hill you've seen that famous trail going up the side of the draw that's the place we went up right there
Just below that, the American dead that had been killed in that were laid out in rows.
Of course, there were lots of dead Germans all over the place.
But they didn't have them nicely laid out in rows.
It was only later that Gray's registration took care of the German dead.
Indeed.
So your young men, the 25 young men that were under you, five tanks, five in each tank, they were...
they were getting a taste of life or as it were death that they maybe weren't prepared for, but they saw it.
Well, they tried to prepare us for that.
We were required to see films of why we fight.
And it showed the death houses.
It showed the devastation of France and Czechoslovakia.
And everyone was required to see those, all the dead people and all that.
But when they began to see real dead people, especially our own soldiers,
They questioned, shall we go up on the hill there and look at that machine gun nest that's been wiped out?
Sure, go on up there.
There were eight or ten Germans had been wiped out by a man I later met and knew how he did that with grenades.
He had to go up that hill somewhere and throw grenades into that machine gun nest.
That machine gun nest no doubt was what was spraying the beach with
machine gun fire.
That's the one that killed most of the invading infantrymen, whom I got to know later.
It's interesting that you talked about Point de Hoc and General Rudder.
Even though you didn't know General Rudder at the time, later when you found out the history of General Rudder and that he, as you looked on your field glasses over there, you'd have known you could have seen that happen.
But later you did get to know General Rudder and his wife Margaret and their family.
Y'all talked about this.
Yes, we did.
We talked about it.
And I talked to her.
And even after he died, I went to see her.
And we visited.
And one or two of his men came back to visit her.
After he died, they kept up with it.
Right.
And I met him in the Army Reserve.
After I came back, I stayed in the Army Reserve.
And he commanded the division that I was in.
So I saw him every summer.
uh off and on for a couple of weeks uh going to summer camp right all those years then uh got a job moved from baylor down to a and m and there he was uh he greeted me at the door so to speak he was glad to see me i bet he was and you him also yeah that's a great part of your story uh let's talk about uh now past d plus one you're on the beach and you're you're moving in
with, I guess, a final goal is to move into Germany.
Talk about the resistance that you encountered, that your group encountered, and sort of the trip into Europe.
On the beach, in the hedgerows, the resistance was infantry.
Not very few tanks got there, German tanks.
Although there were some, and of course they were formidable for us in American tanks.
Our American tanks were not
competitive tank for tank.
Our forte was having more of them and moving faster.
That was the difference between German tanks and American tanks.
And we moved on shore.
It was the job of the infantry to clear those hedgerows.
And I don't know the combat that they had in North Africa.
This was the first infantry division, Africa, Sicily, Italy.
They had plenty of combat ahead of the beach.
And I don't know what they had there, but in the hedgerows, they were perfect cover for infantrymen, and it was a job to clear the fields one or two at a time.
And the tanks helped them immeasurably.
And so they were glad to see us, and we were glad to see them because they protected us.
from the German anti-tank things.
The Panzerfaust and the bazookas, which is the infantryman carrier, which can wipe out a tank.
And we had to have the infantry with us to keep their infantry from knocking out our tank.
I know it was interesting that you told me that when you were moving along with the ground infantry, they'd walk along right beside your tanks.
And you had been trained at Fort Knox to be more spearhead type tanks.
That's not the way it really turned out.
Not the way we did it there.
Immediately we found out that that was not the way we could fight in the hedgerows.
That we had to be moving pillboxes, not armored spearheads.
And we had communication between the ground, the infantryman on the ground had to be such that we put a telephone on the back of the tank so that a sergeant or a lieutenant could run up behind the tank and pick up the telephone and say, there's some Germans down by those trees down there, wipe them out, or we'd spray the trees.
with machine guns and wipe them out.
And they really, our infantry really liked that.
Yeah, the telephone on the back of the tank.
That wasn't something that originated, that was there originally.
That was something you all came up with.
We came up with it and they gave it to us.
They made it available immediately.
We just put an ordinary telephone.
on the back end of the tank.
Right, right.
Sometimes it was a lot of sitting and waiting, as you said.
You told me Montgomery was playing around a little bit and you sat and wait.
I think you went, what, 13 miles in 13 days or something like that?
Yeah, something like that.
We went very, very slowly.
And there was some fighting almost all the way there, the infantry tank cooperation kind of fighting.
Then we got to this town called Cormont, and we sat there.
It took us two or three weeks to get there.
Then we sat there for two or three weeks until they got ready for the so-called breakout at St.
Lowe.
Right, right.
And eventually, I believe, to Auchin, is that right?
Eventually, then after we dashed across France, up the east side of Paris, up to Belgium, and then turned right and moved into Germany at Auchin.
At Auchin.
And arrived there on your birthday, right?
September the 17th.
Yeah, right.
Indeed.
You had a little, you lost a battle with a beer barrel.
You got to tell that story.
Oh, we had not had any R&R recreation in this, from June the 6th to November.
Hadn't had any R&R.
So that's the first time the 1st Division was pulled out of the line.
taken back to the rear areas and given a chance to get their act together.
And of course we had a party.
And we went to the beer cellars, the German beer cellars, and they are cellars, way down under the buildings, to get beer for these parties.
And they carried them out in kegs, just like the kegs we have around the campus here.
And in the darkness in that thing, a guy ahead of me turned around and says,
This thing's pretty heavy.
I believe I'll just drop it here.
So we turned around and dropped it and it hit my foot.
Crushed it completely.
So a couple of days later, after hobbling around, they sent me to the hospital.
They said, your foot's all broken up.
You can't do anything for a while.
You were out for a couple of months.
A couple of months.
I missed the winter fighting.
The coldest part of it.
And I had limited duty.
Right.
A month in the hospital.
And then a month in a replacement depot while I waited to get to wear a boot again.
Right.
And when I got to wear a boot again, then I went back up and joined the same unit.
Yes, sir.
And they were way past, up into mid-Germany by then.
And joined the same unit, had some of the same soldiers with me.
They had lost a few in the meantime.
Indeed.
In fact, they lost the lieutenant who took my place, was killed by artillery fire.
Right.
Came in into the house where he was.
One of those battles I believe was right around Christmas, Christmas Eve night, that that happened also.
you were a tank commander and uh commander and i had five tanks which i commanded besides my own tank right which had uh four men and myself each tank is a crew of five and we had uh radio communication between all the tanks and also with a company commander and uh we didn't have any infantry radio until we got those telephones
Then we got those telephones.
We did a lot better.
Yes, indeed.
The communication, just the communication part of it is you all knew what each of you were doing.
Yeah.
I need to backtrack because you told me a story when we were visiting earlier about that you carried gas masks because of the rumors that the Germans would use gas warfare.
And sometimes there was a mix-up in communication there that caused some problems.
Tell that story.
By the time, on July the 15th or so, we had now...
disembarked 150,000 soldiers or so in a very small area above the beach there.
So there was a soldier over 15 feet, I think, all over the beach.
And communication was mostly by a voice, hollering at each other.
And one night, just after dark, a gasoline truck came up with our gasoline for the tanks.
started unloading it over there, and somebody hollered down the line, hey, here's your gas.
And everybody within hearing, he said, gas attack.
So everybody scrambled for their gas mask.
And I tell the joke, maybe it's true, maybe it's not, that my tank and my gas mask was in a muddy field 100 yards away from me.
And I got from where I was to that tank, got my gas mask on, didn't get my feet muddy.
Now, maybe that's not quite true.
You were moving that fast.
Yeah, we were moving that fast because it was a false alarm, of course.
Sure.
We didn't see any gas.
All you heard was the word gas.
Just the word gas came out.
That just meant one thing to you.
Yeah, yeah.
I guess...
The most remarkable experience I had was to see, besides the beach itself, which I got to see a lot of, on the breakthrough on July the 25th, six weeks later at St.
Lowe, we organized to do a breakthrough in Dash for Paris.
That day, the Air Force came over and bombed ahead of us.
3,000 Air Force bombers came over.
We were sitting on a hill behind the line, and these people came over in groups of flights, nine planes to a flight.
And it took them an hour and a half to pass over our head and bomb the part of the German line that we were going to go through.
The noise from those B-17 motors, they came over at 5,000 feet.
And, of course, that's very low.
Any aircraft can knock them out of the sky real quick.
The noise absolutely vibrated the ground in our tank for an hour and a half there.
And we were not in the assault for this breakthrough.
Others were going to do the assault.
We were going to pass through like a halfback going through a hole in the line and make a dash for Paris.
So the first planes that came over, the German 88s raised their guns from anti-tank to anti-aircraft and knocked out three B-17s in that lead part.
But immediately the American artillery observer zeroed in on those anti-tank guns, wiped them out in two minutes.
There were no more anti-aircraft fire.
and the rest of the 3,000 airplanes passed over our head and didn't lose a single one.
That's an incredible story, my goodness.
But I'm told it's one of the greatest air shows that ever happened.
Yes.
But it compared, in terms of a spectacle, it compared very well with the beachhead itself, with the breakout.
Indeed.
The way you describe it, it certainly is.
We want to go to some photographs, some photographs that you have in your home that you have graciously supplied to us.
Not a whole lot of them, but some, and we want to go to them right now.
We're visiting with Colonel Lannis Hope.
This is your shadow box of your awards and some of your medals.
Don't have time to point out every one of them, but we see there sort of in the middle, you see the bronze star.
Talk a little bit about your shadow box.
Well, the bronze star wasn't, that's the fourth level of award for valor.
Right.
the Congressional Medal of Honor being the first, and somewhere to a couple of months down the line from the invasion, those people who had not been nominated for a medal of some kind said, okay, you've been here for two months and you fought and you haven't lost your unit, you haven't made any mistakes, we think you ought to have a bronze star.
So we didn't know it at the time, but having the Bronze Star would give you five extra points on the point scale to get you to go home.
So it was worth it right there?
It was worth it right there?
It was worth it, yeah.
It was worth it right then.
So they gave me the Bronze Star for two months of combat is what it might do.
Let's move on to the next picture.
This is a photograph of you as a member of the Texas Tech band.
Is that correct?
I believe that's right.
And you're the second one from the left in that picture.
We haven't talked a lot about you as a musician.
We're going to get to that as we have time.
You were a member of the Texas Tech band back in the 1940s.
And that's quite a section right there.
And you're the second one from the left.
You played the trumpet.
Yeah.
And still do.
There's your glamour shot as a member of the Texas Tech band.
The Texas Tech uniform, yeah.
They had shortly got those new uniforms.
Were they called the Red Raiders back then?
Did they call themselves the Red Raiders back then?
No, the Matadors.
They were Red Raiders, yes.
They were also the Matadors, I believe, early.
Okay, let's move on.
I think we have a picture of your unit that was taken before D-Day.
That's the officers of the Union.
You were the back row, second one from the right, I believe.
Is that correct?
The two Texans who were second and third on the left side were killed in action.
This was a studio-type picture taken by every unit prior to D-Day, knowing that we'd lose a lot of these people.
And this was a good one to keep forever.
Yes.
Indeed, and you have all the names there.
And again, I believe you're, is that right?
You're the back row, second one from the right.
Yeah.
Okay, let's move on to, there's a couple of photographs.
There's a dashing young soldier there.
Okay.
Looked like a movie star.
That looks like a Hollywood picture right there on the left.
That's a peacetime thing before I went overseas.
On the left, just after I'd finished OCS at Fort Knox, Kentucky.
came back through Texas and going to the California desert, where I stayed for six months.
Then I came back to Texas again, and lo and behold, that's when the girl I've been going with off and on for two years, and we got married.
And that's a picture of us.
That's Peggy.
On the wedding.
And Lana's Hope.
What a great looking young couple.
Yeah.
That's wonderful.
That's some great photographs.
The war, like everybody in Europe, after the Germans surrendered, everybody was getting ready to go to Japan.
Then the bomb was dropped and the conflict ended.
You came back home, you were in the reserves for a while, but you pursued a career in music as a band director, but then you had to give that up.
Yeah.
Right.
I didn't know it, but my hearing had been severely damaged in the war.
Many reasons for that.
I won't go into that, but my discharge doctor verified that I had a hearing loss, but they didn't know it would affect my music.
But after I'd been working as a band director for a couple of years, they decided I was handicapped that I should do something else besides the band.
Well, that's when I went into a graduate program in psychology at Tech and at University of Texas, where I got my PhD.
Right, right.
And you worked in Austin, you worked in Waco.
at Baylor University as a, I believe you said, as assistant dean in charge of residence halls, which involved a little psychology in itself.
Yes, I used it.
I used to be in a residence hall.
I know that that could involve a little counseling.
But then you came to Texas A&M in the early 60s.
Is that right?
Yes.
And talk briefly about why you came here and what you did.
And people didn't really understand what your role was here for a while.
Well,
Texas A&M was 6,000 male students all in the Corps.
Right.
And they had been that way for many, many years.
And the vestiges of a counseling center were here.
They called it the basic division.
And they had a couple of psychologists, reading specialists and things like that to help with academic advising and things like that.
But they had one counseling psychologist, and he departed.
He was a colleague of mine at Texas.
And this job came open, and I applied for it and got it.
And you were a counselor at Texas A&M for several years, right?
Yes, 10 years.
For 10 years?
I spent, well, longer than that, 61 to 86.
Right.
25 years.
Indeed.
You had been 10 years in Waco, I believe.
Yeah, 10 years in Waco.
Before that.
Yeah.
You were raised in West Texas near Lubbock, went to Borger High School, I believe it was, a child of the Depression, right?
I had not much to do with the military, although at Texas Tech I was in ROTC.
Right.
And even though it was only a year, that gave me a little bit of up when they mobilized the 36th Division for wartime.
That mobilization came about before Pearl Harbor.
And immediately we mobilized for one year.
But of course we didn't get away for five years.
And a lot of Texas Tech students knew this one year and they were not going to get drafted.
So a bunch of us joined, particularly in the band.
We joined this military band so we would play.
for our military career.
Right.
And not knowing that we would all be pretty active.
Most of us eventually went to the Air Force or went to OCS and took commissions and fought the war.
Indeed you did.
And we're glad that you did.
Thank you.
And we're out of time, but thank you very much for your service, Colonel Hope.
Right.
Colonel Lannis Hope is Brazos County's only witness to D-Day.
His service to our country then and to his community now are indeed our reward.
We thank Lannis Hope for his service and to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turveyville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.